---
title: *Accouplement*
subtitle: Vicissitudes of an architectural motif in classical France
author:
- name: P.P. Palazzo
  affiliation: University of Brasilia School of Architecture and Urbanism
abstract: >
  Coupled columns in French architecture and the reaction to
  their use from the Renaissance up to the classical rationalism of the
  early twentieth century hinged on the debates regarding the relationship
  between structural stability and visual delight, over the backdrop of
  the search for a national classical tradition. This architectural motif
  was variously put forward under the argument of the load-bearing
  performance of materials, as a logical derivation of column spacing
  rules in the classical canon, or even as a reinterpretation of gothic
  bundled piers. The practical usefulness and moral suitability of iron
  reinforcement in the wide spans entailed by coupled columns accompanied
  these debates from the seventeenth-century Louvre Colonnade up to
  Perret's case for the monumental use of reinforced concrete.
---


Introduction
============

*Accouplement* consists in the use of paired columns, most notably in
the context of a free-standing colonnade. It was described by the
academician, Quatremère de Quincy (1755--1849), as a "fault" and a first
step on the way to vice (1788). The coupling of classical columns was
both a recurring motif in French classical architecture and a matter of
controversy in structural and aesthetic theory.

Its use is attested already during the Renaissance, as in Philibert De
l'Orme's (1514--70) designs for the châteaux of Anet (1543--66) and
Villers-Cotterêts (after 1552). The canonical exemplar, however, and the
only one notable enough for Quatremère to engage with explicitly, was
the Colonnade on the east façade of the Louvre (ca. 1667--78). The
controversy regarding the structural performance of coupled columns and
their place in the classical canon was, indeed, sparked by this
monumental screen, and lasted into the early twentieth century. Debates
about proportions, historic precedent, and decoration alternated with
speculations on thrust resistance, the suitability of flat arches to
clear spans, and whether iron reinforcement were a legitimate
architectural device.

In spite of the controversy, the use of coupled columns was widespread
in French architecture during the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries,
both as reminiscences of the monumentality of the Louvre and as
practical solutions for articulating wide bays using the classical kit
of parts. De l'Orme promoted them as part of his proposed adaptations of
the Italian classical orders to the smaller, weaker blocks of French
limestone. A century later, polemic raged on the status of coupled
columns as tokens of an independent French classicism, reminiscent of
gothic structures, and their appropriateness and performance as
structural supports.

As structural science progressed, however, the terms of the discussion
shifted from whether coupled columns were better than isolated ones to
the technical means employed in stabilising any sort of classical
composition. With technicians thus waiving their part in the debate, the
nineteenth century saw a conflict between aesthetic condemnations of the
grandeur associated with coupled columns and their frequent use as
devices of monumental composition.

The account that follows points out a few among the most significant
uses of coupled columns in the history of French architecture,
concentrating on the critical writings that address the matter of
*accouplement* in the classical tradition.

![](media/image1.jpeg){width="3.543307086614173in"
height="3.937007874015748in"}![](media/image2.jpeg){width="3.543307086614173in"
height="3.937007874015748in"}


Coupled columns in classical architecture
=========================================

Medieval and renaissance origins of coupled columns
---------------------------------------------------

The repeated attempts at pinpointing the historical justification for
coupled columns, as well as more recent refusals to do so, constitute in
themselves an aspect of the history of French architectural theory.
Several critics followed Claude Perrault (1613--88) in tracing the
practice of *accouplement* back to the gothic building tradition of wide
bays separated by pier bundles (Vitruve 1673, 76).

The comparison seems far-fetched by current historiographic standards;
gothic piers and classical colonnades seem to belong to fundamentally
different building cultures. However, rather than dismissing the
comparison out of hand, one might wonder why it could even be considered
in the first place---and be supported by classicist authors. Clues to
this are to be found both in the compositional logic of gothic
architecture itself, and in the technical strand in French classical
architecture, which, as pointed out by architectural historian
Jean-Marie Pérouse de Montclos (2001), built upon and remembered the
achievements of gothic architects. The medievalist, Philippe Plagnieux
traced the development of bundled piers to the dual intent of visually
"carrying down to the ground the building frame" and of expressing "the
new concern for spatial unification" (2008, 78).

The taste for clearly marked alternation between wide spans and strong,
articulated piers, together with the technical skill set required to
achieve it, had been handed down through De l'Orme and his generation.
Scottish architect William Ward (1865--1924) remarked, tersely, that
"the native, free naturalistic spirit, which \[gothic\] represented,
remained potent in design . . . . while indirect Gothic influence is
traceable even in the eighteenth" century (1911, 1:xxv).

The Baron von Geymüller (1835--1909), a precursor in the systematic
historiography of French architecture, articulated a dual genealogy for
the coupled colonnade: on the one hand, drawing from gothic tradition
the principle of structural and visual alternation; on the other,
appropriating the high Roman renaissance motif of the rhythmical bays,
as popularised by Donato Bramante (Geymüller 1901, 2:378--86). The
canonical twentieth-century authority on French classicism, Louis
Hautecœur (1884--1973), picked up Geymüller's argument and credited De
l'Orme with establishing rhythmical bays as a standard feature of French
architecture (Hautecœur 1965, 1.2:285).

The Italian architect, Sebastiano Serlio (1475--1554) was among the
first to explicitly single out certain architectural features as being
specifically French (Serlio 1997). De l'Orme, who succeeded Serlio on
several royal building projects, went further and argued French builders
had to make adaptations to the classical orders and their rules due to
the differences in structural performance between Italian marble and
French limestone. At the same time, he put forward a natural right, of
sorts, to create new, "national" orders, complete with specific rules
for intercolumniation (De L'Orme 1567, fol. 218 v.^o^--219 r.^o^).

The earliest documented use of a coupled colonnade, at the château of
Anet (Figure 1), predated De l'Orme's work on that site (Hautecœur 1965,
1.2:237). De l'Orme is, however, singular for having developed a theory
of rhythmical intercolumniations as an offshoot of his proposed French
order (1567, fol. 233 v.^o^--234 v.^o^). He exemplified this usage in
the unfinished park chapel for the château of Villers-Cotterêts
(ca. 1553). The record drawing, by Jacques Androuet du Cerceau
(1515--85), portrays a temple front with coupled columns in the French
order (Figure 2).


The apex of coupled colonnades in the seventeenth century
---------------------------------------------------------

Bramantesque and triumphal-arch versions of the coupled column motif
were common in French palaces and churches, during the late sixteenth
and early seventeenth centuries (Figure 3). A few examples displayed, in
their courtyards, freestanding colonnades with coupled columns modelled
after Anet, such as the hôtels of Lunaret and de Manse, both in
Montpellier (Hautecœur 1948, 2.2:205).

![](media/image3.jpeg){width="3.5305555555555554in"
height="5.373611111111111in"}

François Mansart (1598--1666), celebrated by art historian Claude Mignot
as one of the most prolific and creative French architects in what
pertains to classical ornament and structural devices (Mignot 1998, 29,
48), travelled extensively through France in his early career, picking
up and reinterpreting renaissance motifs.

On the wing of the château of Blois he designed for Prince Gaston
d'Orléans (1635--1638), Mansart turned them into two freestanding
colonnades (Figure 3)![](media/image4.jpeg){width="3.543307086614173in"
height="2.358267716535433in"}. Their construction, and particularly the
groups of three columns at each end, harked back to the gothic device of
pier bundles. The exceptionally wide spans, highlighted by the
repetition of triglyphs on the frieze, were a *tour de force* made
possible by the use of overhanging conical vaults, "a link between the
Middle Ages and the Early Modern period" (Pérouse de Montclos 2001,
198). Such vaults were first described by De l'Orme, whose books were
listed in Mansart's library (Mignot 1998, 28).

In other words, all of the structural, functional, and aesthetic reasons
for the popularity of *accouplement* were summarised in his design for
Blois: the gothic taste for wide spans and bundled piers, daylighting
requirements of the French climate, and the playful display of such
technical achievements as overhanging vaults and entablatures built as
flat arches (Pérouse de Montclos 2001, 55).

Another three decades would elapse, however, before a coupled colonnade
was to be used on the outer façade of a building and spark, for the
first time, controversy regarding its suitability as an architectural
motif. These debates were to revolve, for the next three hundred years,
around the new east façade of the Louvre, and for good reason. Under the
influence of Cardinal Jules Mazarin (1602--61), tutor to young King
Louis XIV (1643--1715), French architects and their clients showed a
renewed interest in Italian style. This trend was to shape the push for
grandeur in the Sun King's classicism as well as the backlash against
its perceived excesses. Both aspects were nowhere more evident than in
the Louvre Colonnade.

![](media/image5.jpeg){width="7.365277777777778in"
height="3.5479166666666666in"}

The *premier architecte du roi*, Louis Le Vau (1612--70), was
acknowledged by art historian Hillary Ballon (1999, 104) as a follower
of Mansart. In his designs for the enlargement of the Louvre (1657--64),
Le Vau had been experimenting with dissolving the façade wall into a
screen of coupled colossal, engaged columns framing expansive windows
(Whiteley and Braham 1964)---an approach also explored, around 1665, by
Mansart himself. Meanwhile, at the royal château of Vincennes, Le Vau
introduced, in 1658, a monumental portal reminiscent of the
Villers-Cotterêts chapel drawings.

After Mazarin's death, Louis XIV's superintendent of building works,
financier Jean-Baptiste Colbert (1619--83) took it upon himself to
micromanage the completion of the Louvre while addressing the king's
political iconography. In this process, Gianlorenzo Bernini
(1598--1680), the most acclaimed European architect of his time, was
called upon in 1664 to provide detailed designs. These were scrapped
three years later in favour of the proceedings of a committee under
Colbert's close supervision. Its members were Le Vau, the royal painter,
Charles Le Brun (1619--1690), and Mansart, replaced upon his death by
the physician and translator of Vitruvius, Claude Perrault (Hautecœur
1924).

The committee's final design featured a colossal, freestanding colonnade
of coupled columns backed by a blind wall (Figure 4). Mansart's legacy
lived on in the balance between Le Vau's "decorative approach to the
orders" (Ballon 1999, 104) and Perrault's admiration for his
predecessor's abstract sense of grandeur. At the same time, the
completed façade exhibited, to a great extent, the committee's attempt
to replicate Bernini's monumentality through sheer size and repetition.
It also responded to coupled colonnades within Jacques Lemercier's
(1585--1654) older *guichet* at the opposite end of the Louvre
courtyard.

The Colonnade sported exceedingly slender Corinthian columns, to
compensate for the sturdiness expressed by their pairing. To span the
lengths of the architraves, constructing the entablatures as flat
arches---a well-established solution at the time---was not deemed
sufficient: a complex system of iron tie bars, diagonal braces, and even
shear-resisting stirrups were put in place to ensure the stability of
the system (Figure 5). Each element, taken in isolation, was not new to
French construction practice, but their combination in the Colonnade's
aesthetic and structural features seemed daring and even shocking to
contemporaries and later commentators.

![](media/image6.jpeg){width="3.5388888888888888in"
height="2.2159722222222222in"}


The coupled colonnade as a controversial motif
==============================================

Structural debates
------------------

Claude Perrault, later to be regarded by academician Jacques-François
Blondel (1705--74) as the chief, if not sole author of the Colonnade,
took great pains to justify this design both after antique precedent and
on the grounds of national preference. The latter he deemed "different
from that of the Ancients, and perhaps in this it owes something to
gothic, in that we enjoy air, daylight, and openings" (Vitruve 1673,
76).

Perrault's technical justification was, on the other hand, convoluted
and flimsy; it seemed to address the need to resist the *outward* thrust
of the flat arches spanning the depth of the loggia behind the
colonnade, rather than the much more conspicuous open spans along the
colonnade itself. The principle of thrust resistance in stone vaults,
well known since medieval times, is that a greater mass on the outside
edge of a structure is required to direct the thrust vector towards the
ground. However, one would be hard pressed to explain how the
*longitudinal* thickening achieved by the coupled columns would increase
resistance to *transversal* forces.

It was no wonder, then, that mathematician and architect François
Blondel (1618--86) misunderstood Perrault's argument and made a long
refutation of the usefulness of coupled columns in
supporting, not the ceilings covering the depth of the colonnade, but
the span of the architraves along the façade itself (Blondel 1675,
1:228--33). He went on to condemn Perrault's licentiousness in claiming
authority from ancient innovations, a "reasoning that opened the door in
all ages to unruliness," and especially to gothic "impertinences"
(Blondel 1675, 1:235).

![](media/image7.jpeg){width="3.543307086614173in"
height="2.216535433070866in"}

Moreover, Blondel interpreted the use of iron reinforcement not as a
great technical achievement of the modern age, but, on the contrary, as
a confession that the Louvre Colonnade was poorly designed and had to
rely on crutches to compensate for its lack of solidity (Blondel 1675,
1:237).

The debate between Claude Perrault and François Blondel claimed, at
least ostensibly, scientific and mathematical support, but relied, for
the most part, on geometric solutions handed down from historical
experience (Gerbino 2002, 51). Both authors were aware of the concurrent
development of differential calculus by Newton and Leibniz (Berger 1993,
27), but it was not until Euler's and Lagrange's discussion of column
buckling almost a century later that mathematics was to have any direct
import for structural analysis (Gargiani 2008, 175).

Pierre Patte (1723--1814), who took over Jacques-François Blondel's
teaching chair at the royal academy of architecture, was called on to
assess weather damage to the Louvre Colonnade, which had been left
unroofed due to funding cuts. This enabled him to address flat arch
construction in light of the recent discovery of the use of wood and
metal ties in ancient Roman buildings, as well as of recent French
practice (Patte 1769, 265--68).

Patte's report on the Louvre Colonnade marked a sharp break with the
earlier debate. He declined to pass judgment on the historical
appropriateness of column coupling, concentrating instead on the
distribution of loads. He began by reporting correctly the type of load
each iron section resisted---traction or shear---, and ended up
commending the reinforcements as resulting in a "solid and well
thought-out" design (Patte 1769, 271--73).

Jacques-Germain Soufflot (1713--80) gave a different view of coupled
columns at the church of Sainte-Geneviève in Paris, now the Panthéon.
Rather than using linear colonnades of baroque inspiration, Soufflot
sought to combine grouped columns with groin vaults, juxtaposing gothic
pier bundles and Greco-Roman proportions. Jean-Baptiste Rondelet
(1743--1829) took over this controversial building project in 1770, and
proceeded to write down his findings in a general theory of structural
design.

Rondelet, like Patte before him, refrained from passing any normative
judgement on the appropriateness of iron reinforcement. This was a clear
sign of the new constructive paradigm, in which the choice of structural
shapes was purely an issue of design, not subject to discussion on the
matter of suitability to purpose. To him, *accouplement* was not a
matter of ideology, but just another architectural object in need of
technical solution. With Rondelet ended any technical pretence of
selecting architectural forms based on their intrinsic structural
performance. Construction technology became concerned with providing
stability to *any* architectural form, while the debate on the merits of
coupled columns retreated into aesthetic discourse.


Aesthetic arguments
-------------------

Patte had been active at a time when technological and mathematical
advances enabled new structural forms and improvements upon old ones,
yet, paradoxically, theoreticians increasingly frowned upon such
technical prowess. The amateur writers who came to dominate the
aesthetic debate during the second half of the eighteenth century
"exhibited a wish to rid oneself from the weight of stereotomy, a need
for simplicity, for truth" (Pérouse de Montclos 2001, 219).

For writers such as the Jesuit priest, Marc-Antoine Laugier (1713--69),
this yearning for simplicity bordered on fanaticism. Laugier lauded the
"superb portico" of the Louvre Colonnade for its "naturalness" and
"truth" (Laugier 1753, 36), without regard for the hidden reinforcement.
He went on to recommend the use of coupled columns on church naves
(Laugier 1753, 206), reclaiming, perhaps unwittingly, Perrault's
argument that the motif derived from gothic architecture and its taste
for wide bays.

Rondelet's contemporary, Quatremère de Quincy, was an acclaimed academic
and the main contributor to the architecture section of Diderot's and
d'Alembert's Encyclopaedia, later reworked into two iterations of
architectural dictionaries published in the mid-nineteenth century. His
arguments thus carried great weight among practitioners and critics
alike, even after his death. Moreover, he displayed a theoretical
sophistication far beyond Laugier's infatuation with freestanding
columns.

Quatremère built up, through several of his Encyclopaedia articles, an
argument hinging on the principle that architectural composition was
bound to "specific proportions" by both the laws of nature and their
direct expression in tectonic form (Quatremère de Quincy 1788, 1:111).
His lengthy discussion of the physical and visual weakness of coupled
columns did not reflect, however, a deep interest in the study of
structure or the construction process (see Quatremère de Quincy 1820,
2:56--58).

![](media/image8.jpeg){width="7.361805555555556in"
height="3.5506944444444444in"}

In the end, Quatremère, speaking as a
teacher of architectural design, condemned the use of coupled columns
merely on grounds of the danger of inspiring aesthetic flights of fancy
in students by "making exceptions degenerate into rules" (1788, 1:117).
Thus, he never said a word of Ange-Jacques Gabriel's (1698--1782)
monumental colonnade on the Place de la Concorde (Figure 6), which,
though using single rather than coupled columns, resorted to the very
same bracing systems employed at the Louvre, and even used pointed
relieving vaults.

Quatremère's attitude towards coupled columns remained hegemonic in
architectural theory for the remainder of the nineteenth century,
thanks, in part, to the authoritative student's *Dictionnaire de
l'Académie des Beaux-Arts*, which reproduced most of the text in the
Encyclopaedia (1858, 173). Even authors who did not espouse Quatremère's
neo-classicist views, such as the first national monuments inspector,
Ludovic Vitet (1802--73), joined the condemnation of the Louvre
Colonnade. To Vitet, writing in 1852 and re-edited after his death, this
architectural screen was "not only a discordance in style" (1882, 135)
with respect to his beloved, early renaissance architecture, but also a
defective structure due to the need for iron bracing (1882, 140).
François Blondel's argument remained authoritative among theoreticians
at least a century after the technicians had abandoned it.


coupled colonnades and The architect as technician 
===================================================

Criticism and the trained architect
-----------------------------------

Another opponent of Quatremère's legacy, Eugène-Emmanuel Viollet-le-Duc
(1814--79), became known for his defence of gothic construction under
the argument of structural rationalism (Collins 1967, 198). Even though
he defended the use of iron in combination with stone piers, he also
disapproved of the Louvre Colonnade as lacking both suitability for
purpose and "an art tied to our prior traditions, that is of its time,
[and] perfectly French" in character (Viollet-le-Duc 1863, 1:339). In
the nineteenth century, even an author who took pride in his structural
reasoning had nothing to say about the technical requirements of coupled
colonnades, but could only discuss its purported lack of harmony with
national character.

Nevertheless, there was a truly novel point to Viollet-le-Duc's and
Vitet's arguments against the Louvre Colonnade. Both the professional
architect and the connoisseur politician stressed the fact that the
Colonnade was the work of a physician (Viollet-le-Duc 1863, 1:374; Vitet
1882, 135). Rejecting the cultivated amateur fit well within the
contemporary campaign by César Daly (1811--94) in favour of the
professional organisation and recognition of formally trained architects
(Épron 1997, 45--62). This corporatist attitude, equating coupled
colonnades with amateurish work, was made canonical when Adolphe Lance
(1813--74) replicated it in his biographical dictionary of architects
(1872, 2:197--98).

The professional frame of discussion, however, was to be short-lived.
Even as formally trained architects claimed their unique expertise to
conceive and build, their authority to assess historical architecture
was being taken away by a newer professional group. In a reversal of the
principle of unity between historical precedent and contemporary
practice held dear by the École des Beaux-Arts (Egbert 1980, 66), early
French scholars such as Louis Courajod (1841--96) claimed scientific
detachment was superior to practical engagement (Talenti 2000, 237).

The German art historians, Cornelius Gurlitt (1850--1938, himself a
practicing architect) and Geymüller took the lead in drawing up
systematic explanations of classical architecture in France. Coupled
columns were once again to become relevant objects of study, yet only at
the price of no longer being critiqued in terms of their architectural
merit, but rather being treated as explanatory evidence in the
description of broader art historical processes.

![](media/image9.jpeg){width="3.5388888888888888in"
height="2.35625in"}

Even as the point of discussion shifted from the
aesthetic or technical aspects of coupled columns to the professional or
scholarly authority of the writers, the actual use of coupled columns
increased in popularity. Charles Garnier's (1825--98) winning entry for
the Paris Opéra (1861--75, Figure 8) certainly contributed to this state
of affairs. It had echoes in a number of student and professional
designs up to Henri Deglane's (1855--1931) Grand Palais, built for the
1900 world's fair (Hautecœur 1957, 7:465).


Rationalist classicism
----------------------

The use of coupled columns faded together with that of load-bearing
stone masonry. Ease of calculation and of laying out ever-larger,
repetitive floor plates in modern buildings meant structural
articulation of the sort coupled columns could provide lost favour among
architects and engineers. A notable exception in this scenario were the
reinforced concrete works of Auguste Perret (1874--1954) that, in a way,
represented a summary of the whole French tradition of *accouplement*.

Among his earliest uses of this motif figures the church of
Notre-Dame-de-la-Consolation in Le Raincy, to the north of Paris
(1922--23). In this building, groups of coupled concrete posts brace the
four corners of the campanile, reinstating the traditional explanation
that grouped columns descended from gothic bundled piers.

As free-standing colonnades made a come-back in the 1930s, several of
Perret's civic buildings featured coupled columns more or less
prominently. On the main entrance to his Mobilier national building
(Paris, 1931), he articulated the exceptionally wide spans with two
pairs of columns, thereby turning utilitarian carriageways into a
monumental portico. The motif acquired baroque repetition in Perret's
unbuilt competition entry for the Trocadéro palace (1933). By mirroring
the Louvre Colonnade in a modern idiom, he illustrated his theory that
architecture ought to give the impression of "having always been there"
(Thubert 2014, 33).

To this effect, Perret's work embodied a tension between, on the one
hand, the modernist intent of freeing architecture from symbolism and
"any figurative feebleness whatsoever" (Abram 1997, 103), and, on the
other, the evident symbolic character---and figurative by allusion to
the Louvre---of his colonnade.

Perret's protégé, Fernand Pouillon (1912--86), employed the rhythmical
bay as an organising principle in his reconstruction of the old harbour
district in Marseilles (1951--56), though with piers rather than
columns. Despite these brilliant examples, the taste for rationalist
monumentality, and thus for references to the classical tradition, did
not survive the 1950s.


Conclusion
==========

*Accouplement* was a widespread architectural motif in French
classicism. Even though it had its roots in the Italian renaissance,
only in France did coupled columns see various, long-lasting
applications as well as equally long-lasting controversy. Their use in
rhythmical bays and free-standing colonnades exemplified, on several
occasions, the opportunity for innovation and the limits to rule-bending
in classicism.

The ebb and flow in the practical and theoretical popularity of coupled
columns highlights changing attitudes towards monumental façades and
their relationship to structural or functional requirements. At times,
*accouplement* was put forward as an explicit idiom signalling the
peculiar character and requirements of French architecture. At other
times, coupled colonnades were disparaged as foreign to the French
spirit and to constructive rationality.

In the midst of these debates, architects eagerly adopted and reused the
coupled column motif to signal and increasingly standardised set of
meanings: monumentality, references to the Louvre, and compositional
simplicity. The combined histories of the use and debate around coupled
columns gives a parallel history of French classicism, stitching
seemingly unrelated episodes into a coherent story that can be told
alongside other existing narratives.


References
==========

Abram, Joseph. 1997. 'Auguste Perret, Le Classicisme Rationnel et La
Monumentalité'. In *Années 30 : L'architecture et Les Arts de l'espace
entre Industrie et Nostalgie*, edited by Jean-Louis Cohen, 96--105.
Paris: Éditions du Patrimoine.

Académie des Beaux-Arts. 1858. *Dictionnaire de l'académie des
Beaux-Arts*. Paris: Firmin Didot.

Ballon, Hilary. 1999. *Louis Le Vau: Mazarin's Collège, Colbert's
revenge*. Princeton: Princeton Architectural Press.

Berger, Robert W. 1993. *The Palace of the Sun: The Louvre of Louis
XIV*. University Park, Penn.: Pennsylvania State University Press.

Blondel, François. 1675. *Cours d'architecture Enseigné dans l'Académie
Royale d'Architecture*. Vol. 1. Paris: L. Rouilland.

Collins, Peter. 1967. *Changing Ideals in Modern Architecture
1750--1950*. Montréal: McGill University Press.

De L'Orme, Philibert. 1567. *Architecture*. Paris: F. Morel.

Egbert, Donald Drew. 1980. *The Beaux-Arts Tradition in French
Architecture*. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Épron, Jean-Pierre. 1997. *Comprendre l'éclectisme*. Paris: Norma.

Gargiani, Roberto. 2008. 'La résistance des colonnes : expériences sur
la qualité des matériaux et calculs de la forme parfaite au cours du
XVIII^e^ siècle'. In *La colonne : nouvelle histoire de la
construction*, edited by Roberto Gargiani, 173--191. Lausanne: Presses
polytechniques et universitaires romandes.

Gerbino, Anthony. 2002. 'François Blondel: Architecture, Erudition and
Early Modern Science'. Ph.D. Dissertation. New York: Columbia
University.

Geymüller, Heinrich Adolf, Freiherr von. 1901. *Die Baukunst der
Renaissance in Frankreich*. Vol. 2. Kröner.

Hautecœur, Louis. 1924. 'L'auteur de la Colonnade du Louvre'. *Gazette
des Beaux-Arts* IX (745):151--168.

---------. 1965. *Histoire de l'architecture Classique en France*. Vol.
1.2; Vol. 2.2 (1948); Vol. 7 (1957). Paris: Picard.

Lance, Adolphe. 1872. *Dictionnaire des architectes français*. Vol. 2.
Paris : V. A. Morel.

Laugier, Marc-Antoine. 1753. *Essai sur l'architecture*. Paris :
Duchesne.

Mignot, Claude. 1998. 'Un architecte artiste'. In *François Mansart: le
génie de l'architecture*, edited by Jean Pierre Babelon and Claude
Mignot, 23--92. Paris: Gallimard.

Patte, Pierre. 1769. *Mémoires sur les objets les plus importans de
l'architecture*. Paris: Rozet.

Pérouse de Montclos, Jean-Marie. 2001. *L'architecture à la française:
du milieu du XV^e^ à la fin du XVIII^e^ siècle*. 2nd ed. Paris: Picard.

Plagnieux, Philippe. 2008. 'Colonnes, piliers et piles composés.
Évolution du support dans l'architecture médiévale en France : problèmes
techniques ou formels ?' In *La colonne : nouvelle histoire de la
construction*, 73--83.

Quatremère de Quincy, Antoine Chrysosthome. 1788. *Architecture*. Edited
by Denis Diderot and Jean le Rond d'Alembert. Vol. 1. Encyclopédie
Méthodique. Paris: Panckouke.

---------. 1820. Vol. 2. Encyclopédie Méthodique. Paris: Agasse.

Serlio, Sebastiano. 1997. *Serlio on Domestic Architecture*. Translated
by Myra Nan Rosenfeld. New York: Dover.

Talenti, Simona. 2000. *L'histoire de l'architecture en France:
émergence d'une discipline*. Paris: Picard.

Thubert, Emmanuel de. 2014. 'Le mobilier national'. *Construction
moderne* hors-série (January):22--33.

Viollet-le-Duc, Eugène-Emmanuel. 1863. *Entretiens sur l'architecture*.
Vol. 1. Paris: A. Morel.

Vitet, Ludovic. 1882. *Le Louvre et le nouveau Louvre*. Paris: Calmann
Lévy.

Vitruve. 1673. *Les dix livres d'architecture de Vitruve, corrigez et
traduits nouvellement en françois, avec des notes & des figures*.
Translated by Claude Perrault. Paris: Jean Baptiste Coignard.

Ward, William Henry. 1911. *The Architecture of the Renaissance in
France*. Vol. 1. London: B.T. Batsford.

Whiteley, Mary, and Allan Braham. 1964. 'Louis Le Vau's Projects for the
Louvre Colonnade --- I'. *Gazette des Beaux-Arts* LXIV (1150):285--296.
